Characterization of lipoteichoic acids as Lactobacillus delbrueckii phage receptor components.Lipoteichoic acids (LTAs) were purified from Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. lactis ATCC 15808 and its LL-H adsorption-resistant mutant, Ads-5, by hydrophobic interaction chromatography. L. delbrueckii phages (LL-H, the LL-H host range mutant, and JCL1032) were inactivated by these poly(glycerophosphate) type of LTAs in vitro in accordance to their adsorption to intact ATCC 15808 and Ads-5 cells.
Phage P68 virion-associated protein 17 displays activity against clinical isolates of Staphylococcus aureus.Phage-encoded murein hydrolases are either part of the lysis cassette or found as structural components of the phage virion. Here, we show that Staphylococcus aureus bacteriophage P68 contains a virion-associated muralytic enzyme. Protein 17 has a composite structure. The N-terminal part comprises the muralytic activity, whereas the C-terminal part is required for binding to the cell surface. A high multiplicity of infection with phage P68 caused rapid lysis, and purified protein 17 triggered premature lysis when added to S. aureus cells prior to infection with P68, suggesting that it functions to weaken the murein at the site of phage DNA entry. Protein 17 displayed activity against clinical S. aureus isolates, which are resistant to infection by phage P68, demonstrating that the protein targets surface structures distinct from the phage receptor. This broad activity spectrum of protein 17 could qualify virion-associated muralytic enzymes as attractive antimicrobials.
Identification of the Bacillus anthracis (gamma) phage receptor.Bacillus anthracis, a gram-positive, spore-forming bacterium, is the etiological agent of anthrax. It belongs to the Bacillus cereus group, which also contains Bacillus cereus and Bacillus thuringiensis. Most B. anthracis strains are sensitive to phage gamma, but most B. cereus and B. thuringiensis strains are resistant to the lytic action of phage gamma. Here, we report the identification of a protein involved in the bacterial receptor for the gamma phage, which we term GamR (Gamma phage receptor). It is an LPXTG protein (BA3367, BAS3121) and is anchored by the sortase A. A B. anthracis sortase A mutant is not as sensitive as the parental strain nor as the sortase B and sortase C mutants, whereas the GamR mutant is resistant to the lytic action of the phage. Electron microscopy reveals the binding of the phage to the surface of the parental strain and its absence from the GamR mutant. Spontaneous B. anthracis mutants resistant to the phage harbor mutations in the gene encoding the GamR protein. A B. cereus strain that is sensitive to the phage possesses a protein similar (89% identity) to GamR. B. thuringiensis 97-27, a strain which, by sequence analysis, is predicted to harbor a GamR-like protein, is resistant to the phage but nevertheless displays phage binding.
The ectodomain of the viral receptor YueB forms a fiber that triggers ejection of bacteriophage SPP1 DNA.The irreversible binding of bacteriophages to their receptor(s) in the host cell surface triggers release of the naked genome from the virion followed by transit of viral DNA to the host cell cytoplasm. We have purified, for the first time, a receptor from a Gram-positive bacterium that is active to trigger viral DNA ejection in vitro. This extracellular region ("ectodomain") of the Bacillus subtilis protein YueB (YueB780) was a 7 S elongated dimer forming a 36.5-nm-long fiber. YueB780 bound to the tail tip of bacteriophage SPP1. Although a stable receptor-phage interaction occurred between 0 and 37 degrees C, complete blocking of phage DNA release or partial ejection events were observed at temperatures below 15 degrees C. We also showed that the receptor was exposed to the B. subtilis surface. YueB differed structurally from phage receptors from Gram-negative bacteria. Its properties revealed a fiber spanning the full length of the 30-nm-thick peptidoglycan layer. The fiber is predicted to be anchored in the cell membrane through transmembrane segments. These features, highly suitable for a virus receptor in Gram-positive bacteria, are very likely shared by a large number of phage receptors.
Identification of the cell surface receptor for bacteriophage 18 from Aeromonas hydrophila.Bacteriophage 18 was previously isolated by multiplication in Aeromonas hydrophila. The bacteriophage receptor was shown to be the lipopolysaccharide (LPS), specifically the low MW polysaccharide fraction (LPS core oligosaccharide) A. hydrophila mutants, resistant to this phage were isolated and found to be devoid of LPS O antigen by several criteria and had alterations in the lipopolysaccharide core.